---
title: Words that Ever Play Well
subtitle: Part II on Negative Polarity Items
abstract: >
  In Part II we dive into the work of Anastasia Giannakidou, and come up with a
  new, more general, more powerful, and more correct licensing condition:
  the *nonveridicality approach*.
bibliography: npi.bib
note: >
  **News:** I have added an atom feed. It is generated by hand, so do let me
  know if there are any problems.
  </br>
  **Poll:** Would you like my blog to have comments? I am considering
  [commento](https://commento.io/), but don't want to take the time if no one
  cares --- please contact me, and let me know what you think!

header-includes: >
  <style>
    /* I'll use ~~ ~~ to mark bad sentences */
    del {
      color: red;
      text-decoration: none;
    }

    dl {
      background: #F1F1F1;
      border: 1px solid #E1E1E1;
      border-radius: 4px;
      padding: 1rem 1.5rem;
    }

    dt {
      font-weight: bold;
    }
  </style>
---

Review
======
[In Part I](/posts/2020/01/19/NPI.html) we introduced *Negative Polarity Items*, a
special class of words that just don't seem to *ever* play right. We tried to
tackle the question **"in what contexts can we use NPIs?"**.

Ultimately we came up with (what I would call) a pretty compelling answer;
*downward entailment* is when something you know about $X$ tells you
something about a subset of $X$.

(@dd) No dog can fly. $\vDash$ No talking dog can fly.
(@du) A talking dog can fly. $\vDash$ A dog can fly.

Because "talking dogs" $\subseteq$ "dogs", we call (@dd) a *downward
entailment* (or *DE*) and (@du) an *upward entailment* (or *UE*). And the magic
is that **DEs *licence* our troublesome NPIs**! [@ladusaw]

:::example
No dog can *ever* fly.\
~~#A dog can *ever* fly.~~
:::

In the end, however, we were left with a problematic sentence:

:::example
Exactly 10 people have *ever* been to my house.
:::

This sentence is **neither upward nor downward entailing.** In this post, we're
going to do something about that!

If you're reading this, I'm assuming Part I already got your attention. So, if
you'll permit me, I'm going to get a *little more technical* here. Time to
put on our big-kid-amateur-semanticist pants!

The Big Picture
===============
Before we get started, let's take a deep breath and ask ourselves, **"why does
this matter?"** It's fun, sure, but does it have a real impact on our ideas
of language?

Well-Formedness
---------------
To answer your question:

(@col) Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.

Noam Chompsky said that, and I think he knows a thing or two![^noam] It was to
demonstrate (among other things) **there exists well-formed sentences that are
meaningless**. So what do I mean by well-formed?

[^noam]: This comes from Chomsky's famous [Syntactic
  Structures](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syntactic_Structures) monograph,
  which could be considered the birth of [Transformational
  Grammar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transformational_grammar).

(@bcol) ~~#Furiously sleep ideas green colorless.~~

Your brain was able to "read" (@col). Were I to ask you "what sleeps?" you
could respond "colorless green ideas... whatever that means." Example (@bcol),
however, hardly deserves the title "sentence". It is not *grammatically
well-formed*. Let's look at some other examples:

Table: "Meaningful" here really means *semantically* (as opposed to
  grammatically) well-formed.

Sentence                                Grammatic  Meaningful
-----------------------------------     ---------  ----------------------------
The talking dog can bark.               Yes        ~~No~~[^talkdog]
The talking dog bark can.               ~~No~~     ~~No~~[^almost]
The capital of J. Kafka is Vientiane.   Yes        ~~No~~[^capital]
The capital of Loas is Vientiane.       Yes        Yes

[^talkdog]: "The talking dog can bark" is meaningless in a subtle kind of way.
  **It *presupposes* that there is a talking dog.**  Because there isn't, the
  "subject" is an empty set. "Colorless green things are bad" is more obviously
  wrong, but for the same reason --- there is no such thing. Interestingly, we
  are able to say what both sentences *would* mean if there *were* such things.

[^almost]: One could argue "the dog bark can" is meaningful --- an English
  speaker could "get the gist", even though it's not a sentence. This is
  another topic for another day.

[^capital]: This kind of error is known as a *category faliure*. Certain
  categories of lexical items are bound in certain ways, and a category failure
  ignores those bindings. In this example, the category "people" may not posses
  capitals.


NPI Errors
----------

What about "I found *someone*" vs ~~"#I found *anyone*"~~? Is that a failure
of meaning, like (@col), or of grammar, like (@bcol)? Qualitatively, it
feels closer to a grammar problem than a semantic problem --- it has that
"it hurts my ears" quality to it.[^psych]

[^psych]: **There is psycho-linguistic data to support this.** We can measure
  brain patterns when a listener hears something "wrong". Biophasic N400
  patterns reflect hearing syntactic problems.  P600 patterns reflect
  semantically problems. NPI errors cause *both* patterns, suggesting **NPI
  errors are taking place at both the semantic and syntactic level.** [@giann,
  p 6]

And that is my (somewhat abstract) point --- we have been talking about NPI
errors as *semantic* in nature, having to do with what a sentence *means*,
rather than the structure of the sentence itself. Well-formedness, however, is
thought of as being essentially *syntactic*. **NPI errors bring into question
whether semantics play a roll in well-formedness.**

Situations Not Covered by DE
============================
OK, back to the task at hand!

We've already found one example where DE seemed to fail us.  We labeled it as
*non-monotonic*, meaning neither UE nor DE. If we're going to fix DE, we should
understand just exactly when it fails.

Questions
---------

:::example
Have you *ever* seen *anyone*?
:::

Questions don't entail much of anything. If I ask "were is the milk", at
best you could infer that I don't know where the milk is (and that I would
sure like some). It tells you nothing about the more specific blue milk;
it tells you nothing about less specific fluids. **Questions are neither
upward or downward entailing.**

It actually seems that NPIs are *most* used in questions (across all
languages), so this is a real problem for us!


Imperatives
-----------

::::example
Pick *any* painting.
::::

Subtly, this isn't DE --- no one asked you to "pick *any blue
painting*". You *may*, but that would be a different sentence.

:::example
Pick any painting. $\vDash$ You may pick any blue painting.\
Pick any painting. $\not\vDash$ Pick any blue painting.
:::

Others
------
In @giann [Section 3.2.3], a number of other examples are laid out, including:

-----------------    ----------------------------------
Habituals              "He was sleeping with *anyone*."
Deontic Sentences    "You may not sleep with *anyone*."
Disjunction (Or)         **Doesn't occure in English**
-------------------------------------------------------

Most are non-obvious why they don't fall under DE, and some don't have English
equivalents. **The take away is, DE doesn't always seem to work.**

A Solution
==========
We started things off with the interface between semantics and grammar. Then we
examined some sentences which are *not downward entailing*, but which *do allow
NPIs*. Here's what I want to do now:

1. Define a funky little term
2. Show anything DE can explain, our new term covers
3. Demonstrate it solves our problems

And the funky little term of the day is **(non)veridicality!**

(Non)veridacity
---------------
*Veridicality* is related to the truth or existence of something. Before we
define this, let's go strait to some examples:

------------------------------------    -----------------------------------------
**"I *found* the meaning of life."**    We could call "found" **veridical**,
                                        because it implies that there is a
                                        meaning of life.

**"I am *looking* for the meaning of    "Looking" does not imply there exists
life."**                                a meaning of life. We call it
                                        **nonveridical**.

**"There is no meaning of life."**      This states non-existence.  We could
                                        call it **antiverdical**.[^anti]
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^anti]: It's worth nothing antiveridical $\subseteq$ nonveridical.

Ok, that's not so bad. So is the *sentence* veridical? Or just a word?

"Found", "looking", and "there is no" can all be called *operators*. Here, they
operate on the existence of $p$, the meaning of life. If I *"find"* some $p$,
then I know $p$ exists (written $O_\text{find}p \to p$ ).[^exists]

[^exists]: If you're a stickler, I'm being a little messy here --- sometimes
  we're asking "is $p$ true?" Other times "does $p$ exist?" The trick is that
  every noun is actually a proposition "this noun exists".

For practice, let's see what these sentences say (or don't say) about $p$:

-------------------------------------  -----------------------------  ------------------
I found the meaning of life.           $O_\text{find}p \to p$              **veridical**
I am looking for the meaning of life.  $O_\text{look}p \not \to p$      **nonveridical**
There isn't meaning of life.           $O_\text{is not}p \to \neg p$   **antiveridical**
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Intuitively, if you want to know if something is veridical, ask yourself "does
this imply that something exists?" But if we're going to use *veridicality* to
solve our NPI woes, we're going to need an accurate definition.

Veridical
  : An operator $O$ is *veridical* if $Op \to p$.

If we test the NPI *any*, we can get an intuition about how this will work:

---------------------------------------    --------------------
~~#I found *any* meaning of life.~~               **veridical**
I am looking for *any* meaning of life.        **nonveridical**
There isn't *any* meaning of life.            **antiveridical**
---------------------------------------------------------------

The claim is that **nonveridacity licences NPIs**.

DE $\subseteq$ Nonveridacity
-----------------------------
So how are nonveridacity and downward entailing related? They seem very
different.  @zwarts actually provides a proof that **all DE operators are also
nonveridical**. Walking through it isn't too difficult.

We'll look at operators that take *two* arguments --- things like "and" ($p
\wedge q$), "or" ($p \vee q$), "if/then" ($p \to q$), "with", "without", etc.
We call these *connectives*.

Veridical Connective
  : A connective $C$ is said to be *veridical* (with respect to $p$) if $pCq
  \to p$. That is, if one knows $pCq$, then one can infer $p$.\
  **Example:**\
  $p \wedge q \to p$\
  If you know "$p$ and $q$", then you must know $p$!

So how, then, do a DE connectives look like?

Downward Connective
  : Let $C$ be downward entailing with respect to $p$. Knowing $r \to p$
  (whenever $r$ is true, $p$ is true) is enough to know $pCq \to rCq$.\
  **Example:**\
  "I will kill you" $\to$ "You will die"\
  "If you sleep with anyone, I will kill you" $\to$ "If you sleep with anyone,
  you will die"\
  "If $p$ then $q$" is DE with respect to $q$.

This is really the same definition we used in [Part
I](/posts/2020/01/19/NPI.html#downward-entailment), but now we are saying $r \to p$,
rather than $R \subseteq P$.  Showing that DE $\subseteq$ Nonveridacity is now
very strait-forward. We can prove that **no connector $C$ can be both DE and
veridical.**

1. Let $C$ be veridical and DE.
2. Assume $pCq$.
3. Note that, because $a \wedge b \to a$, $p \wedge \neg p \to p$.
4. Because $C$ is DE, we know $(p\wedge \neg p)Cq$.
5. Because $C$ is veridical, we know $(p\wedge\neg p)$.

This is obviously a contradiction, therefore $C$ was impossible![^lem] That
means that **any connector that is DE must be nonveridical.**

[^lem]: I actually have a serious problems with this proof. If you know me
  well, that shouldn't surprise you. Is there a reason why a contradiction
  shouldn't be allowed into language? I may write a post about this in the
  future.

Nonveridacity Solves Our Problems
---------------------------------
Last step: show that nonveridacity actually solves our problems! Everything in
[Part I](/posts/2020/01/19/NPI.html#have-we-found-our-solution) is covered, but what
about the new problems?

### Questions

:::example
Have you *ever* seen *anyone*?
:::

A question, inherently, does not imply truth --- if you already knew something
was true, why are you asking?

### Commands

:::example
Find *anyone!*
:::

The same goes for commands. "Name one good Matrix Sequel" --- see, you can't!
That sentence didn't say such a thing exists (almost the opposite).

~~"#I found anyone"~~ doesn't work, as it claims that anyone exists.  But "find
*anyone*" is still a command, even if there is no one to find.

## Quantifiers

:::example
All students who saw *anything* went to the police.\
Zero students who saw *anything* went to the police.\
~~#Both students who saw *anything* went to the police.~~\
~~#One student who saw *anything* sent to the police.~~
:::

Think about what each quantifier really means:

--------  ---------------------------------------------------------------------
**All**   Doesn't actually claim students exist. "All students, i.e. nobody".
**Zero**  Likewise doesn't claim the existence of observant students.
**Both**  Implies there were exactly two students.
**One**   There must be at least one such student.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

DE doesn't cover this discrepancy, but nonveridicality seems to have our back!

The Jury Isn't Out
==================
DE does a pretty good job predicting when NPIs can be used. Nonveridicality
does an *even better job.* But what about our original problem child?

:::example
Exactly 10 people have ever been to my house.[^rescue]
:::

[^rescue]: One solution to this particular sentence is *Rescuing by
    nonverridacality.* [@giann Page 20]

I... Uh... Oh no...

All Kinda of Polarity!
----------------------
The discovery of DE excited everyone --- finally we could put all these NPIs in
a nice clean box, and put a bow on it. The reality, however, is more
complicated. Especially when we started examining more and more languages.

Maybe most importantly, **there are multiple kinds of polarity items!**

-----------------------  ------------------------------------------------------
**Strong NPIs**          Only occurs in antiveridicalic contexts. "Either" in
                         English has this property.

**Free Choice Items**    "Pick any tie" often uses a special "any" in other
                         languages.

**Positive Polarity      "I didn't buy *some* things" implies that there *are*
Items**                  things I did buy, although the sentence only
                         contained a negative expression. These words have
                         strange NPI like properties.

**Minimizers**           "I barely know anything" is a true *and* acceptable
                         sentence, unlike "~~I barely know a lot~~".
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Each type has related but different rules that govern their usages.  Especially
looking at other languages casts light on the differences that come up; each
language has troves of examples. Here's one, for instance:

:::example
Exactly two students said anything.\
~~#Akrivos dio fitites ipan tipota.~~ (Greek translation)
:::

Our problem child behaves as expected in Greek! Maybe... maybe that's going to
have to be good enough for today.

And here is where I leave you. Maybe a simple solution is out there. Then
again, it could just be that language is an amazingly complex beast.

Parting Notes
-------------
Thanks for following me through this little journey. It's been a lot of fun for
me to learn about polarity items, and various ways we can look at them. Most of
what I've presented here is based on work by Anastasia Giannakidou --- if you
want more information, I'd suggest starting with her paper in the references.
[@giann]

It's a shame we only worked through English examples. If I get enough requests,
I might make a third post demonstrating some NPIs in other languages ---
whatever you speak, I'm sure they're there.

References
==========
::: {#refs}
:::
