---
title: Words that Ever Play Well
subtitle: Part II on Negative Polarity Items
abstract: >
  In Part II we dive into the work of Anastasia Giannakidou, and come up with a
  new, more general, more powerful, and more correct licensing condition:
  the *nonveridicality approach*.
note: >
  This is a draft. I am in the process of cutting it down, adding citations,
  fixing typos, and clarifying. As with the last post, I have attempted to
  make this readable by a more general audience. I'm not sure I achieved that,
  and I hope those with a background in logic or semantics don't find things
  dull.  If you notice anything, or have suggestions, please contact me!

  **News:** I have added an atom feed. It is generated by hand, so do let me
  know if there are any problems.

  **Poll:** Would you like my blog to have comments? I am considering
  [commento](https://commento.io/), but don't want to take the time if no one
  cares --- please contact me, and let me know what you think!

header-includes: >
  <style>
    blockquote {
      margin-bottom: 2.5rem;
      margin-left: 0;
      margin-right: 0;
    }

    blockquote > ol, blockquote > p {
      margin: 0 .2rem;
      font-size: 110%;
      background: #F1F1F1;
      border: 1px solid #E1E1E1;
      border-radius: 4px;
      padding: 1rem 1.5rem;
    }

    /* I'll use ~~ ~~ to mark bad sentences */
    del {
      color: red;
      text-decoration: none;
    }

    dl {
      background: #F1F1F1;
      border: 1px solid #E1E1E1;
      border-radius: 4px;
      padding: 1rem 1.5rem;
    }

    dt::before {
      font-weight: bold;
    }

    dt {
      font-weight: bold;
    }
  </style>
---

Review
======
[In Part I](./2020-01-19-NPI.html) we introduced *Negative Polarity Items*, a
special class of words that just don't seem to *ever* play right. We tried to
tackle the question **"in what contexts can we use NPIs?"**.

Ultimately we came up with (what I would call) a pretty compelling answer;
*downward entailment* is when something you know about $X$ tells you
something about a subset of $X$.

> (@dd) No dog can fly. $\vdash$ No talking dog can fly.
> (@du) A talking dog can fly. $\vdash$ A dog can fly.

Because "talking dogs" $\subseteq$ "dogs", we call (@dd) a *downward
entailment* and (@du) an *upward entailment*. And the magic is that **DEs
*licence* our troublesome NPIs**!

> No dog can *ever* fly.\
> ~~#A dog can *ever* fly.~~

In the end, however, we were left with a problematic sentence:

> Exactly 10 people have *ever* been to my house.

This sentence is **neither upward nor downward entailing.** In this post, we're
going to do something about that!

If you're reading this, I'm assuming Part I already got your attention. So, if
you'll permit me, I'm going to get a *little more technical* here. Time to
put on our big-kid-amateur-semanticist pants!

The Big Picture
===============
Before we get started, let's take a deep breath and ask ourselves, **"why does
this matter?"** It's fun, sure, but does it have a real impact on our ideas
of language?

Well-Formedness
---------------
To answer your question:

> (@col) Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.

Noam Chompsky said that, and I think he knows a thing or two! It was to
demonstrate (among other things) **there exists well-formed sentences that are
meaningless**. So what do I mean by well-formed?

> (@bcol) ~~#Furiously sleep ideas green colorless.~~

You're brain was able to "read" (@col). Were I to ask you "what sleeps?" you
could respond "colorless green ideas... whatever that means." Example (@bcol),
however, hardly deserves the title "sentence". It is not *grammatically
well-formed*. Let's look at some other examples:

Table: "Meaningful" here really means *semantically* (as opposed to
  grammatically) well-formed.

Sentence                             Grammatic  Meaningful
-----------------------------------  ---------  -----------------------------
The talking dog can bark.            Yes        ~~No~~[^talkdog]
The talking dog bark can.            ~~No~~     ~~No~~[^almost]
The capital of Tyler is Vientiane.   Yes        ~~No~~[^capital]
The capital of Loas is Vientiane.    Yes        Yes
Blargs can run.                       Yes(ish)   ~~No~~[^blargs]
Blarg run home.                       ~~No~~     ~~No~~[^blarg]

[^talkdog]: "The talking dog can bark" is meaningless in a subtle kind of way.
  The problem is, it *presupposes* that there is a talking dog.  Because there
  is no such thing, the "subject" is an empty set.  "Colorless green things are
  bad" is more obviously wrong, but for the same reason --- there is no such
  thing. Interestingly, we are able to say what they *would* mean if there
  *were* such things.

[^almost]: One could argue "the dog bark can" is meaningful --- an English
  speaker could "get the gist", even though it's not a sentence. This is
  another topic for another day.

[^capital]: This kind of error is known as a *category faliure*. It's a kind of
  lexical anomaly that bind certain categories together. Here, the lexical
  category of people may not possess capitals.

[^blargs]: Although "blargs" isn't a word, it fits the phonetic rules of
  English.  Any speaker would be able to identify it as a plural noun.

[^blarg]: Again, the phonetics of English tell us that "blarg" must be a
  singular noun. This, then, is a morphology problem --- "run" cannot be used
  with a singular subject.

NPI Errors
----------
What about ~~"#I found *anyone*"~~? Is that a failure of meaning, like (@col),
or of grammar, like (@bcol)? Qualitatively, it feels closer to a grammar
problem than a semantic problem.[^psych] It has that "it hurts my ears" quality
to it.

[^psych]: I am almost entirely ignorant of psycho-linguistics, but there is
  fascinating data to support this. Biophasic N400 patterns reflect attempts to
  process a sentence syntactically. P600 patterns reflect attempts to process
  information semantically. NPI errors illicit *both* patterns, suggesting
  **NPI errors are taking place at both the semantic and syntactic level.**

And that is my (somewhat abstract) point --- we have been talking about NPI
errors as *semantic* in nature, having to do with what a sentence *means*,
rather than the structure of the sentence itself. Well-formedness, however, is
thought of as being essentially *syntactic*. **NPI errors bring into question
whether semantics play a roll in well-formedness.**

Situations Not Covered by DE
============================
OK, back to the task at hand! We've already found one example where DE seemed
to fail us.  We labeled it as *non-monotonic*, meaning neither UE nor DE. There
is a quick band-aid that could seem to save us --- non-UE. It is clear that
Non-UE $\subseteq$ DE.

"Exactly 10 people have ever been to my house" is, in fact, not upward
entailing. Unfortunately however, we can find more situations missed by non-UE.
We could say **non-UE underpredicts NPIs**. Let's look at some new
problem-sentences.

Questions
---------
> Have you *ever* seen *anyone*?

Questions don't have entailments like statements do. "Is this question UE or
DE" just doesn't make sense. Even Ladusaw, who first identified the
relationship between DE and NPIs, thought that this was a serious empirical
problem --- especially because NPIs in questions are extremely common across
all languages.

Imperatives
-----------
> Pick *any* painting.

Subtly, this isn't DE --- no one asked you to "pick *any blue
painting*". You *may*, but that would be a different sentence.

> Pick any painting. $\vdash$ You may pick any blue painting.\
> Pick any painting. $\not\vdash$ Pick any blue painting.

Others
------
In Giannakidou (2011) Section 3.2.3[^Giannakidou], a number of other examples
are laid out, including *habituals*, *deontic* sentences, and (probably most
interesting) *disjunction*. Most are non-obvious why they don't fall under DE,
and some don't have English equivalents. This post is already more technical
than I wanted, so let's just leave things easy for today.

A Solution
==========
Alright kids, buckle up! We started things off by talking about why this
matters --- the interface between semantics and grammar. Then we examined some
sentences which are not downward entailing, but which do allow NPIs. Here's
what I want to do now:

1. Define a funky little term
2. Show that this term is a *superset* of DE
3. Show that it solves our problems

And the word of the day is **veridicality!**

(Non)veridacity
---------------
*Veridicality* is related to the truth or existence of something. Before we
define this, let's go strait to some examples:

------------------------------------    -----------------------------------------
**"I *found* the meaning of life."**    We could call "found" **veridical**,
                                        because it implies that there is a
                                        meaning of life.

**"I am *looking* for the meaning of    "Looking" does not imply there exists
life."**                                a meaning of life. We call it
                                        **non**veridical.

**"There is no meaning of life."**      This states non-existence.  We could
                                        call it **anti**verdical. Note that
                                        antiveridical $\subseteq$ nonveridical.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

"Found", "looking", and "there is no" can all be called *operators*. They
operate on the existence of $p$, the meaning of life. If I *"find"* some $p$,
then I know $p$ exists. I could write that as $O_\text{find}p \to p$.[^exists]

[^exists]: If you're reading carefully, you'll note I'm conflating $p$ exists,
  and $p$ is true. This conflation is somewhat normal in semantics. You'll have
  to trust me that it doesn't break anything.

For practice, let's see what these sentences say (or don't say) about $p$:

-------------------------------------  -----------------------------  ------------------
I found the meaning of life.           $O_\text{find}p \to p$              **veridical**
I am looking for the meaning of life.  $O_\text{look}p \not \to p$      **nonveridical**
There isn't meaning of life.           $O_\text{is not}p \to \neg p$   **antiveridical**
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Intuitively, if you want to know if something is veridical, ask yourself "does
this imply that something exists?" But if we're going to use *veridicality* to
solve our NPI woes, we're going to need an accurate definition.

Veridical:
  : An operator $O$ is *veridical* if $Op \to p$.

If we test the NPI *any*, we can get an intuition about how this will work:

---------------------------------------    --------------------
~~#I found *any* meaning of life.~~               **veridical**
I am looking for *any* meaning of life.        **nonveridical**
There isn't *any* meaning of life.            **antiveridical**
---------------------------------------------------------------

The claim is that **nonveridacity licences NPIs**.

DE $\subseteq$ Nonveridacity
-----------------------------
The next step is to show that nonveridacity is a widening of DE, and not some
totally new unrelated concept. To do this, let's look at operators that take
*two* arguments --- things like "and" ($p \wedge q$), "or" ($p \vee q$),
"if/then" ($p \to q$), "with", "without", etc. We call these *"connectives"*.

Veridical Connective
  : A connective $C$ is said to be *veridical* with respect to $p$ if $pCq \to
  p$. That is, if one knows $pCq$, then one can infer $p$. For example $p
  \wedge q \to p$.

That's a very specific definition! What, then, does a DE connective look like?

Downward Connective
  : Let $C$ be downward entailing with respect to $p$. Knowing $r \to p$
  (whenever $r$ is true, $p$ is true) is enough to know $pCq \to rCq$.\
  **Example:**\
  "I will kill you" $\to$ "you will die".\
  "If you sleep with anyone, I will kill you" $\to$ "If you sleep with anyone,
  you will die".\
  "If $p$ then $q$" is DE with respect to $q$.

This is really the same definition we used in [Part
I](./2020-01-19-NPI.html#downward-entailment), but now we are saying $r \to p$,
rather than $R \subseteq P$.  Showing that DE $\subseteq$ Nonveridacity is now
very strait-forward. We can prove that **no connector $C$ can be both DE and
veridical.**

1. Let $C$ be veridical and DE.
2. Assume $pCq$.
3. Note that $p \wedge \neg p \to p$.
4. Because $C$ is DE, we know $(p\wedge \neg p)Cq$.
5. Because $C$ is veridical, we know $(p\wedge\neg p)$.

This is obviously a contradiction, therefore $C$ was impossible![^lem] That
means that **any connector that is DE must be nonveridical.**

[^lem]: If you know much about my beliefs, you should know I'm cringing right
  now. There is so much to say about this proof, but this post is already way
  too long.

Nonveridacity: The NPI Context
------------------------------
We already know that nonveridacity covers all cases we addressed in [Part I](
./2020-01-19-NPI.html#have-we-found-our-solution). But how bout these new ones?

> Have you *ever* seen *anyone*?

A question, inherently, does not imply truth --- if you already knew something
was true, why are you asking?

> Find *anyone!*

The same goes for commands --- they aren't getting at the existence of
something. ~~"#I found anyone"~~ doesn't work, as it claims that anyone exists.
But the command "find *anyone*" is a command, even if there is no one to find.

This actually seems to work with quantifiers, too!

> Zero students who saw *anything* went to the police.\
> ~~#Both students who saw *anything* went to the police.~~\
> ~~#One student who saw *anything* sent to the police.~~

"Zero students" doesn't actually imply that any students exists, where as
"both" implies that there must be exactly two, and "one" implies there must be
at least one. DE doesn't cover this discrepancy, but nonveridicality seems to
have our back!

The Hunt Never Ends
===================
In the last two post we've looked at NPIs in English --- mostly *ever* and
*any*, but there are actually plenty. We showed that downward entailment does
a good job of predicting where these words can be used. We then showed some
limitations of DE, and expanded DE with a new concept called
**nonveridicality**.

Nonveridicality does an *even better* job of explaining where these words pop
up, but what about our original problem child?

> Exactly 10 people have ever been to my house.[^rescue]

[^rescue]: One solution to this particular sentence is *Rescuing by
    nonverridacality.*

I... Uh... Oh no...

All Kinda of Polarity!
----------------------
The discovery of DE excited everyone --- finally we could put all these NPIs in
a nice clean box, and put a bow on it. The reality, however, is more
complicated.

First of, we've focused on NPIs, but **there are multiple kinds of polarity
items!**

-----------------------  ------------------------------------------------------
**Strong NPIs**          Only occurs in antiveridicalic contexts. "Either" in
                         English has this property.

**Free Choice Items**    "Pick any tie" often uses a special "any" in other
                         languages.

**Positive Polarity      "I didn't buy some things" implies that there are
Items**                  things I did buy, allthough the sentence only
                         contained a negative expression.

**Minimizers**           "I barely know anything" is a true *and* acceptable
                         sentence, but "I barely know a lot" doesn't work.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Each of these have related but certainly different rules that seem to govern
their usages. And especially looking at other languages casts light on the
differences that come up. For example

> Exactly two students said anything.\
> ~~#Akrivos dio fitites ipan tipota.~~ (Greek translation)

Our problem child behaves as expected in Greek!

Each of these classes have rules that seem to govern them. Each language has
a trove of examples. I had hoped to include non-English examples, but I think
I've already taken enough of your time.

Parting Notes
-------------
Thanks for following me through this little journey. It's been a lot of fun for
me to learn about polarity items, and various ways we can look at them. Most of
what I've presented here is based on work by Anastasia Giannakidou --- if you
want more information, I'd suggest starting with [this paper of
hers](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/255578263_Negative_and_positive_polarity_items_Variation_licensing_and_compositionality).

If anyone has any questions, contact me! If I get enough requests, I might make
a third post simply showing some PIs in various other languages --- it's been
a shame to only focus on the English examples.

[^Giannakidou]: [Giannakidou, Anastasia.
  (2011)](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/255578263_Negative_and_positive_polarity_items_Variation_licensing_and_compositionality).
  Negative and positive polarity items: Variation, licensing, and
  compositionality. Semantics: An International Handbook of Natural
  Language Meaning.
