---
title: To Contract Or Not To Contract
subtitle: Do you Wanna?
abstract:
update:
note:
bibliography: posts/wanna.bib
header-includes: >
  <style>
    .bad {
      color: red;
    }

    .bad::before {
      content: "*";
    }

    .good {
      color: green;
    }

    .good::before {
      content: "✔";
    }

    .t1 {
      color: green;
    }

    .t2 {
      color: blue;
    }

    .s {
      opacity: 50%;
    }

  .tree .node rect {
    opacity: 0;
  }

  .tree .links {
    stroke: black;
    opacity:1;
  }
  </style>
---

Most English speakers, I think, would agree that these two sentences are
essentially the same:

(@party) I *want to* go to the party! $\Leftrightarrow$ I *wanna* go to the
  party!

Now, I need to make a confession: *I don't know a single thing about phonetics
or phonology.* (It's next on my list, ok!?) But, in my ignorance, I wouldn't
have thought twice about (@party) --- I would have just said something like

> This is some basic phonetic thing! The more frequently you say something, the
> more you can fudge the pronunciation. No big deal.

That is... until last month. You see, as has been pointed out to me, **there
are times when *"wanna"* is just flat wrong.**

(@pup-g) Who do you *want to* kiss that puppy? (I want Douglas to kiss that puppy!)
(@pup-b) [Who do you *wanna* kiss that puppy?]{.bad}

I'll admit, I had to stare at (@pup-b) a while. Would I *understand* someone
who said it? Of course. But I just wouldn't say it, if I were speaking
naturally. Try saying both the sentences in (@party) slowly; now try (@pup-b)
--- it fails the test miserably.

And it's not just that *some sentences* can't use "wanna" --- the *meaning* of
the sentence seems to matter! For example, let's say you and your friends are
going to watch a very exciting basketball game:

(@win1-g) Let's watch the game! Who do you *want to* win? (I want the 76ers to
win!)
(@win1-b) Let's watch the game! [Who do you *wanna* win?]{.bad}

But now, picture some very shady team owners, gambling their players away.

(@win1-g) Who do you *want to* win? (I want to win Joel Embiid!)
(@win1-b) Who do you *wanna* win? (I wanna win Joel Embiid!)

Clearly **just because "want" and "to" are near each other doesn't mean you can
use "wanna"!** This isn't a phonological property of English; there are some
kind of grammar rules dictating when and where "wanna" can pop up in a
sentence!

Today let's try and unlock the mysteries of those rules! So-called
**wanna-contraction** (or **to-contraction**) has been something of a hot topic
ever since the 1970's, when a certain linguist at a certain university in
Massachusetts realized that *"wanna"* solved a mystery of his own.

The Minimalist Answer
=====================

At that time, linguistics was already abuzz with the beginnings of what would
come to be known as the Minimalist Program[^bfg] (to this day still the
dominant force in the study of syntax). A prominent piece of those theories is
something called *movement*.

[Movement](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syntactic_movement)
  : In a syntax tree, certain rules may cause nodes to jump to different
  positions in the tree.\
  **e.g.** In English, questions cause verb movement:\
  "You can do it!" $\Rightarrow$ "Can you do it?"

Let's not get too caught up in what those "certain rules" are. Instead let's
look at a very well-known type of movement: **wh-movement.**

:::example
  **Example:** Consider the sentence *"you do like him".* What if we
  didn't know *who* was liked?

  **"You do like him"[^do] $\Rightarrow$ "Who(m) do you like?"**

  ---------------------------  ------------------------------------------------
  You [do]{.t1} like him.      The auxilary verb is "do".

  [Do]{.t1} you                In English, questions move the auxilary verb to
  [$\square$]{.t1} like him?   the first position.

  [Do]{.t1} you                For our question we want to use "who(m)" instead
  [$\square$]{.t1} like        of "him".
  [whom]{.t2}?

  [Whom]{.t2} [do]{.t1} you    In English, "wh"-phrases get moved to the
  [$\square$]{.t1} like        beginning of the sentence (even before the
  [$\square$]{.t2}?            auxilary verb).
  ---------------------------  ------------------------------------------------
:::

**Now what does this have to do with wanna-contraction?**

[^bfg]: [The Minimalist
  Program](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minimalist_program) (sometimes called
  "MP" for short) is the most dominant theory (or more accurately "program") of
  syntax out there. Defining what the minimalist program is is far beyond the
  scope of this post --- all that really matters right now is that it is an
  important viewpoint in the world of syntax.
[^do]: "You like him", of course, would be a more natural sentence. I chose
  "You do like him" to avoid talking about why "do" suddenly appears in a
  question.

Silent Words
------------

I'm not sure who first noted the idiosyncrasies with "wanna" usage, but
@chomsky1978 were the first to provide a captivating explanation. You see, in
the theory of movement, words don't *just* move --- they leave something
behind!

[Trace](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syntactic_movement#Traces)
: A trace is a hypothetical *silent word*, which is left behind whenever
  movement ocurse in a tree. Traces are usually marked with a "$t$".\
  **e.g.** In "[Who]{.t2} [do]{.t1} you [$t_{\text{do}}$]{.t1} like
  [$t_{\text{who}}$]{.t2}?", we see two traces, each corresponding to a different instance
  of movement.

Now evidence for a silent word[^emptycat] isn't exactly the easiest thing to
come by --- how would you know there is an *unspoken* word sitting in a
sentence?

Chomsky, however looked at sentences like (@pup-b) and (@win1-b) and realized
these were cases where movement was happening!

:::example

**Whenever a trace is found between "want" and "to, it seems to "block"
contraction.**

--------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------
I want to kiss him.\                    There is no trace between "want" and
Who do I **want to** kiss               "to".
**$t_\text{who}$**?\
[Who do I wanna kiss?]{.good}

I want him to kiss the dog.\            There is a trace sitting between "want"
Who do I **want $t_\text{who}$ to**     and "to", which blocks the contraction!
kiss the dog?\
[Who do I **wanna** kiss the
dog?]{.bad}

I want him to win\                      Notice we have *"want him to"* in the
Who do I **want $t_{\text{who}}$ to**   first sentence. That "him" becomes a
win?\                                   trace in the question form.
[Who do I wanna win?]{.bad}

I want to win him\                      If "wanna" would work in the
Who do I **want to** win                non-question sentence, it will work in
$t_\text{who}$?\                        the question form as well.
[Who do I wanna win?]{.good}
--------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------

:::

[^emptycat]: Traces aren't the only example of *silent words* --- they are just
  one instance of something known as an [empty
  category](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Empty_category).

Problems With That Answer
=========================

This explanation can be found in basically any textbook on syntax [@falk2011];
I, for one, learned about it from @carnie2013 [Chapter 5, p.369]. And that's
frankly pretty odd, **because it's generally agreed to be incorrect, or at the
very least dubious**.

I don't mean movement is dubious (that's a whole other debate). It's just that
it doesn't explain what's going on with "wanna". For one, there are a whole
bunch of other times when "wanna" seems to break down.

It's my experience that most English speakers have *even stronger* judgments
about these.

Coordination
: <div>
    When "gluing" verbs together with and/or (known as *coordination*), we find
    that wanna-contraction fails.

    a. [I don't expect, need, or wanna dance.]{.bad}
    b. [I don't wanna or expect to dance.]{.bad}

    It become much less clear why there would be a silent word blocking this
    contraction.
  </div>

Noun-Form
: <div>
    There is a noun form of "want", such as in "my only want is to be remembered".
    Even when to immediately follows this "want" we don't see any contraction..

    (@) We cannot expect that want to be satisfied.
    (@noun-bad) [We cannot expect that wanna be satisfied.]{.bad}

    In (@noun-bad) is almost laughable. It's clear that "want" and "to" simply
    being near each other allows for contraction.
  </div>

Intransitive Want
: <div>
    There is an intransitive form of "want", such as in the sentence "I am
    never satisfied and always wanting". Interestingly, this form doesn't seem
    to contract.

    (@orig) *(In order)* to be an effective over-consumer, you have to really want
    (@posible) You have to really want (in order) to be an effective over-consumer.
    (@cont) You have to really WANNA be an effective over-consumer.

    We see (@posible) *could* have the same meaning as (@orig), but (@cont) can't
    have this reading --- the meaning of the sentence has been changed!
  </div>

Parentheticals
: <div>
    There are also more "random" reasons why "want" and "to" might be next to
    each other, such as in an interjection. In these cases, contraction seems to
    be blocked as well.

    (@) I want, to be precise, a yellow four-door De Ville convertible.
    (@) [I wanna, be precise, a yellow four-door De Ville convertible.]{.bad}
  </div>

The PRO Category
: <div>
    Within Chomsky's theories there are actually *other* silent words! I won't get
    into them, or why they are part of these theories. **The thing that is important
    is that *other* silent words *don't* block contraction!** For example, there's
    the category known as $PRO$. Don't worry if you have no idea what that is; the
    only thing that's important is that it is another silent word, and it should be
    sit here in the sentence.

    (@) I want ${PRO}$ to read.
    (@) What do you want ${PRO}$ to read $t_{\text{what}}$?

    So why would traces block contraction, but not this other silent word? Seems a
    bit inconsistent.
  </div>

A Morpholexical Solution
========================

All of these shortcomings came from @pullum1997, who had a much more convincing
solution to our conundrum: **what if "wanna" was it's own word?**

It isn't that extreme of a thought! It would certainly explain our
data![^verb-classes] And it's not a strange thing to happen; the more something
is said, the more it becomes its own word (or *lexicalizes*).

"Don't" is a perfect example. Native speakers would certainly agree "do not"
sounds *way* scarier that "don't". It doesn't matter if we're speaking slow or
fast --- we don't treat them exactly the same.

So, just as "do not" and "don't" are subtly different, maybe "want to" and
"wanna" are also different (though probably a bit *more* different).

[^verb-classes]: Confused how saying "wanna" would explain the data we're
  seeing? It's well known not all verbs behave the same way. For example, some
  verbs take one object, some take two, and some take none! There are even
  differences in the *kinds* of objects they take (e.g. "wounder" can only take
  a question-clause as an argument, and "think" can only take *finite*
  clauses). There are well-developed models that capture these rules --- for
  today, let's just say that those models could capture the idiosyncrasies of
  "wanna" just as well.

The To-Postfix
--------------

> But... "wanna" isn't *unrelated* to "want to", of course!

Of course not! Actually, we can argue that

Instead of looking at wanna as a contraction, it might make more sense to look
at "to" as a postfix.

Just like a "Wug" + "s" becomes "Wugs"

TO As a postfix
- Just like "-s" in English
- Other words (which also have some interesting usages)
- Why is it pronounced different
  - Just like the plural in English

Parting Notes
=============

This isn't perfect either. Constructivist paper. Some research on acquisition
of this word.


:::comment
More Words
----------

I'm not going to annoy her.
I'm not gonna annoy her.
:::

References
==========
:::refs
:::

<script src="/js/c-com/chomTree_dist.js"></script>
<script>
  chomTree.selectAll('div.tree').each(
    function(p, j) {
      div = chomTree.select(this);
      treeSrc = div.text();
      div.text('');
      const ast = chomTree.parse(treeSrc);
      const root = chomTree.render(ast, div);
    });
</script>
