---
title: Natural Deduction
subtitle: Notation for the Uninitiated
abstract:
update:
note:
bibliography:
header-includes: |
  <script>
  function toggleDisplay(id) {
    var e = document.getElementById(id);
    if (e.style.display === "" || e.style.display === "none") {
      e.style.display = "block";
    } else if (e.style.display === "block") {
      e.style.display = "none";
    }
  }
  </script>
  <style>
    .ans {
      display: none;
      border: 1px solid #bbb;
      border-radius: 4px;
      padding: 1rem 1.5rem;
    }
    .example mjx-container {
      margin: 0;
    }
    .example button {
      text-align: center;
      width: 100%;
    }
  </style>
---
:::comment

$$
  \newcommand{\h}[2]{\begin{array}[b]{c}\dfrac{}{#1}\scriptsize{#2}\end{array}}
  \newcommand{\hypo}[3]{\begin{array}[b]{c}
    \h{#1}{#2} \\ \vdots \\ #3
  \end{array}}
$$
:::

Have you ever been reading, and were suddenly greeted by a mash of symbols like
this?
$$
\dfrac { \dfrac{ \dfrac{ \dfrac{}{A}u \quad \dfrac{}{B}w }
                       {A \wedge B} \wedge_I }
               {B \to A \wedge B} \to_{I^w}}
       { A \to B \to A \wedge B } \to_{I^u}
$$

Judgment and Inference
======================
To understand Natural Deduction we really only need to know two things:

Judgement
: A Judgment is anything that is *knowable*. A judgment $\Gamma$ might be
  formal, such as *"$A$ is true"*, or informal, such as *"Matha is in love"*.

That is meant to be as vague as possible. You may want to judge the type of a
program, the veracity of a mathematical statement, or the meaning of a sentence
in Navajo.

The Inference Line
: Let $\Gamma$ and $\Delta$ be judgements. We read $\cfrac{\Gamma}{\Delta}$ as
  *"$\Delta$ can be inferred from $\Gamma$".* $\Gamma$ is referred to as the
  **premise**, and $\Delta$ the **conclusion**. There might be zero or more
  premises, and always one conclusion.

Now reading these trees becomes pretty easy

<div class="example">
$$ \cfrac{ \;A \quad B\; }{ A \wedge B } $$

::::center
 **Premise:** "$A$" is known and "$B$" is known.\
 **Conclusion:** "$A \wedge B$" can be known.
::::
</div>

Introduction and Elimination
============================

OK, now that we can read the "flow" of a natural deduction proof, we need to
ask ourselves **"what conclusions are legal?"** The whole point of a natural
deduction proof is that *every step should be obviously correct*.

For that reason, we will define every symbol in our system by a set of
*Introduction and Elimination Rules*. I can best explain this with an example,
so let's start with *conjunction*[^conj].

[^conj]: *Conjunction* here means "logical and". So when you see $A \wedge B$,
  it's usually read as "$A$ and $B$".

: The introduction and elimination rules for *conjunction.* By convention, the
  rule being used is written to the left of the inference line.

---------------------------------------- ----------------------------------
$\cfrac{A \quad B}{A \wedge B}\wedge_I$  **Introduction Rule**
$\cfrac{A \wedge B}{A}\wedge_{E1}$       **Elimination Rule 1**
$\cfrac{A \wedge B}{B}\wedge_{E2}$       **Elmination Rule 2**
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

These rules *define* how conjunction works. Do you see how $\wedge_I$ allows
you to *introduce* the "$\wedge$" symbol, whereas $\wedge_{E1}$ and
$\wedge_{E2}$ allow you to eliminate it?

So that was pretty easy --- OK, now you try!

:::example

**Question:** What are the *Introduction Rules* for disjunction?[^dis] *(Hint:
there should be two).*

<button onclick="toggleDisplay('ans-1')">Show/Hide Answer</button>
:::::{.ans #ans-1}
--------------------------------  ---------------------------------
$\cfrac{A}{A \vee B}\vee_{I1}$    **Introduction Rule 1**
$\cfrac{B}{A \vee B}\vee_{I2}$    **Introduction Rule 2**
--------------------------------------------------------------------

That is, simply knowing either $A$ or $B$ is sufficient for knowing $A \vee B$.
:::::
:::

[^dis]: *Disjunction*, of course, means "logical or". Reading $A \vee B$ would
  read as "$A$ and/or $B$".

Now what about the *Elimination Rule* for $\vee$? Can you come up with an
English explanation of the rule? To write the rule down formally, we need one
last bit of notation.

Hypotheticals
=============

What's missing is we have no way of working with "hypothetical situations".
Something like *"if $A$ were true (and I'm not saying it is), $B$ would
follow".*

Hypothetical
: A hypothetical premise $\Gamma$ is written as so:
  $$ \cfrac{}{\Gamma} x$$
  Where $x$ is a number unique for this hypothetical situation.

Now we can write down an Elimination Rule for disjunction![^super]

[^super]: Whenever a rule uses a hypothetical, we usually write down *which*
  hypothetical was used.

$$
  \cfrac{A\vee B\quad\hypo{A}{1}{C}\quad\hypo{B}{2}{C}}{C}\vee_{E^{1,2}}_
$$

In English you might read that as "knowing $A \vee B$, that (hypothetically
speaking) $A$ would lead to $C$, and that (hypothetically) $B$ would lead to
$C$, one could conclude $C$."

Now your turn!

:::example

**Question:** What are the Introduction and Elimination Rules for
  *implication*?[^imp] *(Hint: You should need only 1 of each)*

<button onclick="toggleDisplay('ans-2')">Show/Hide Answer</button>
:::::{.ans #ans-2}
------------------------------------------    ---------------------------------
$\cfrac{\hypo{A}{1}{B}}{A \to B}\to_{I^1}$    **Introduction Rule 1**
$\cfrac{A\to B \quad A}{B}\to_{E}$            **Elimination Rule 1**
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In plain English:

------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------
**Introduction:**  *having a proof from $A$ to $B$ can demonstrate $A \to B$.*
                   [^imp-ent]

**Elimination:**   *knowing $A$ and $A \to B$ can lead to $B$.*
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

:::::
:::

[^imp]: Implication, written as $A \to B$, means "*knowing $A$ leads to $B$".*

[^imp-ent]: Do you feel like you don't understand the difference between a
  hypothetical and implication? Don't worry, it's a subtle difference! They
  seem to capture the same idea of "assume $A$ gets you to $B$". The difference
  is that $A \to B$ is only a statement, and statements need proof. The proof
  for that statement takes the form of a hypothetical.

Some Simple Proofs
==================

I think with $\wedge$, $\vee$, and $\to$ should be enough to test what we've
learned.

:::example
I want to prove $A \to B, \; B \to C \vdash A \to C$:

$$
\cfrac{ \cfrac{ \cfrac{ \h{A}{1} \quad A \to B }{ B }\to_E
                \quad
                B \to C}
              {C}\to_E}
      {A \to C}\to_{I^1}
$$

:::

Here are a few exercises to try your hand at:

(@) Prove $A \to (B \vee C) \vdash (A \to B) \vee (A \to C)$
(@) Prove $A \to B,\; B \to C \vdash (A \wedge B) \to C$
(@) Prove $A \wedge B,\; B \to C \vdash A \wedge C$

Applications
============



